---
layout: post
title: Mutt
categories: twiki
---

Mutt is a gnarly mail client, and excellent for people who deal with large volumes of email. This MUA also allows the use of PGP thus it allows encryption of messages to different users. Also, because of highly-customizable keybindings and configurations, you can tweak mutt to be very personalized and absolutely powerful.

# The Basics

As a new user, you need to edit your `~/.muttrc`. I have an example [on Github][muttrc]. Change the following lines appropriately:

    set from="your_login@rescomp.berkeley.edu"
    set realname="Your Full Name"

Also:

   * Set the `from` field to your email address
   * Set your `realname` to your full name (for nicer `From` headers)

To actually run mutt, type `mutt` on the command-line (on Hal) to open up your email.  However, the *more useful command* is `mutt -y`, which lists relevant mailboxes.  You can alias the command `mutt` to automatically run `mutt-y` for you:

   * Open `~/.bashrc` in a text editor and add the line `alias mutt="mutt -y"`.

That's the basics!  You now have the minimal setup required to run mutt.  But see all the stuff commented out at the bottom of your .muttrc?  Get ready to taste real power...

# Configuring Mutt (.muttrc)

## Signature

There is a line in your `.muttrc` that says `set signature='~/.signature'`.  As you might guess, it takes the text file `~/.signature` and includes the content at the bottom of your email messages.  You can `vim ~/.signature` and fill it in.

## Multiple Mailboxes

Mutt can store mailboxes in the mbox format (all mail stored in one "mailbox" file) or the much, much better maildir format (messages are files in a "mailbox" folder/directory).  We will be using maildir for this guide.

### Creating the Directories

Before you begin creating multiple mailboxes, you should add these lines of code to your `~/.bashrc` to help facilitate the process:

    function mkmaildir {
      mkdir -p ${1}/{new,cur,tmp}
    }

When you run this command (`mkdirmail mailbox_name`), it creates the folder `mailbox_name` with 3 folders inside it: `new`, `cur`, and `tmp`.  These are the folders essential to maildir's functionality.

So once you've sourced that command in your .bashrc (run `source .bashrc`), you're ready to create your mailboxes.  Navigate into `~/mail` and begin creating the custom folders you'd like.  Obviously, these will vary on your job and organizational style:

   * RCCs, for example, can create a folder just for RT tickets:  `[user@hal ~/mail]$ mkmaildir rt`
   * The NetSec team might want a folder for bandwidth cases:  `[user@hal ~/mail]$ mkmaildir bandwidth`

### Make Mutt Recognize the New Mailboxes

Mutt has to recognize the new mailboxes.  In an older version of the guide, I had you list each of your mailboxes manually in your .muttrc, but this line will read them automatically:

    # Mailboxes
    mailboxes `echo $HOME/mail/*`

## Automatically Sort Mail into Separate Mailboxes (Procmail)

Before mail reaches your inbox, it is sorted by procmail. Procmail can filter your incoming messages so that, for example, all email from one address gets saved to a different mailbox by default. 

## Encrypting/Signing Email (PGP)
PGP allows you to do two things: encrypt your mail so that only you or the recipient can read the message, and sign your email so the recipient knows it was you who sent it.

## Colors

Mutt looks pretty bland in black and white. You can add custom color settings by adding it directly to your .muttrc or sourcing it from a separate file (some of us use `~/.mutt/colors.global`). Because colors are a matter of preference, it's best to experiment on your own. You have 16 colors to choose from: white, black, red, yellow, blue, green, magenta, cyan, and their bright counterparts (brightwhite, brightblack...). Get started by looking at ccowart's, markliu's, or efung's files (.muttrc and colors.global).

It's recommended you read about limit searches below before personalizing your colors.

## Fixing Text-Wraps

By default, vim's text wrapping is very broken. If you have vim set to wrap text at 78 characters, and then you go back to a previous line and insert characters in the *middle* of that line, that line will extend past 78 characters. Likewise, if you backspace over some text -- the next line will stay long, and the edited line will be too short.

Deal with it by adding this line to your `.muttrc`:

    set editor="vim +':set textwidth=78' +':set wrap' +'set fo=tcoqwan'"

The key here is the `fo` line, which adds all the magic. To find help on all these options, `:help fo-table`. If you want to be able to edit SMTP headers in this way you will have to add an `l` to the `fo` options, but this will mess some other things up (namely inserting into an already long line). On the other hand, you will want to have this if you like to edit your SMTP headers manually (i.e. you have lines like `set autoedit` and `set edit_headers` in your `.muttrc`). To turn on spell checking, add `+':setlocal spell spelllang=en_us'` to the vim options,  but frankly I (Evan) find this somewhat annoying. If you do use spell checking, you will want to know that hitting `zg` over a word will add it to your personal dictionary, and prevent it from being highlighted as misspelled in the future.

Do not set your text width to something greater than 78. For those of you interested in such matters, here is the official IETF recommendation, from RFC 2822:

> There are two limits that this standard places on the number of characters in a line. Each line of characters MUST be no more than 998 characters, and SHOULD be no more than 78 characters, excluding the CRLF.

# Moving Mountains in Mutt: Using the Mutt Interface

Now that mutt is set up the way you like it, it's time to get used to running the program itself.  The following section will show you how to make the most of your mutt experience.

## Beginner Keystrokes
   
   * ?: Help

This is the very minimum you need to move around:
   
   * j: Next entry (down)
   * k: Previous entry (up)
   * z: Page-down 
   * Z: Page-up
   * Home or =: Jump to first entry
   * End or *: Jump to last entry
   * c: Change directories
   * q: Quit

Dealing with messages:
   
   * m: Compose new message
   * r: Reply
   * g: Group-reply/Reply to all
   * d: Delete (mark for deletion forever.  There's no trash folder!)
   * u: Undelete (unmark for deletion)

## Intermediate Keystrokes

   * 123: Go to message number 123. You can do this with any number.
   * l: Limit command. See Limit Searches below.
   * t: Tag one message. See Tagging below.
   * T: Tag in bulk. See Tagging below.
   * $: Updates the mailbox status (scans for new messages and deletes messages marked for deletion).
   * &: Integrates a tagged (see Tagging below) message into the thread you are looking at currently.
   * ^G (Control-G): Cancels most commands that you are in the middle of if you mess up

## Searching/Filtering: Limit

The limit command is THE way to filter messages.  You can search your messages with a huge range of criteria by typing `l` in a mailbox.  Here is the syntax to creating the most useful patterns:

   * ~A *all* messages
   * ~b EXPR messages which contain EXPR in the message *body*
   * ~d MIN-MAX   messages with *"date-sent"* in a Date range (dates have the format DD/MM/YY in mutt)
   * ~F *flagged* messages
   * ~f EXPR messages originating *from* EXPR
   * ~h EXPR messages which contain EXPR in the message *header*
   * ~N *new* messages
   * ~O *old* messages
   * ~s EXPR messages having EXPR in the *"Subject"* field.
   * ~t EXPR messages addressed *to* EXPR
   * ~T *tagged* messages
   * ~U *unread* messages (either old or new)
   * ~= *duplicate* messages

A complete list of all the patterns can be found in help pages and employees' color files.

Some examples of limit pattern searches (Press `l` and try these):

   * ~s fubar: messages with a subject containing "fubar"
   * ~d <1w: messages less than one week old
   * ~d -31/12/07: messages from Dec 31, 2007 and before
   * ~d 31/12/07-: messages from Dec 31, 2007 onward
   * ~t dchen: messages where the To: field matches dchen
   * ~h oracle: messages that contain "oracle" in the header (Calagenda invites)
   * .: everything. Basically, to remove the limit

Patterns can be combined and very restrictive, like so:
   
   * ~d 19/01/07-15/05/07 ~b 'appointment slots' ~O: old messages sent between Jan 19, 2007 and May 15, 2007 (includes both dates) that has the phrase "appointment slots" in the message body.

## Tagging

Just as Gmail allows you to filter your messages and check off the ones on which you want to perform an action, mutt lets you tag the messages you want to edit as well.  Type `t` to tag an individual message and =T= to tag messages matching a pattern.  In fact, if you limit search first and press `T`, your criteria are carried over so you don't have to type in the pattern again.  Tagged messages will have a * next to them. From here, you can specify what action to perform on tagged messages using ``=:

Example: Delete everything that contains "viagra" in the subject:

    l =~s viagra=
    T <enter> (since the pattern is saved from the limit command)
    ; d

Example: Move everything which matches "dchen" in To: or CC: to a folder =dchen.  This time, let's tag without searching:

    T =~C dchen=
    ; s =dchen <enter>

## Status Flags

To the left of your messages--between the message number and date received, by default--you will see certain characters known as *status flags* that tell you a few things about your message at a glance:

   * D: deleted message (marked for deletion)
   * d: message has attachments marked for deletion
   * K: contains a PGP public key
   * N: new message
   * O: old message
   * P: PGP-encrypted message
   * r: message has been replied to
   * S: message is PGP signed, and the signature is succesfully verified
   * s: message is PGP signed
   * !: flagged message
   * *: tagged message

Some of the status flags can be turned on or off using

   * w: set-flag
   * W: clear-flag

Furthermore, the following flags reflect who the message is addressed to. They can be customized with the $to_chars variable.

   * +: message is to you and you only
   * T: message is to you, but also to or cc'ed to others
   * C: message is cc'ed to you
   * F: message is from you
   * L: message is sent to a subscribed mailing list

## Viewing HTML Messages

Getting HTML-formatted messages is severely annoying.  Here's what you do to view them within mutt:

   * In `~/.muttrc`, add the line `set implicit_autoview`.
   * Create a text file `~/.mailcap` and put one of these two lines:
      * `text/html; lynx -dump -force_html %s; needsterminal; copiousoutput;`
      * `text/html; elinks -dump -dump-charset iso-8859-15 -default-mime-type text/html %s; needsterminal; copiousoutput;`

This uses the terminal-based web browser of your choice to hide the html tags for you.

# Being a Mutt Mastermind (Advanced)

## Folder-Hooks

Folder-hooks can be set up such that when you reply from a certain mailbox, you are able to send emails with a different email address. Let me explain a bit: 

I (Mark) am the Lead NetSec so I must at times respond to questions from residents, but I wouldn't want to send emails to residents from markliu@rescomp.berkeley.edu right? Folder-hooks allow me send email, for example, when I am in my netsec folder, with the email address netsec@rescomp.berkeley.edu.

The resident has now just sent an email to netsec@rescomp.berkeley.edu, and I have sent an reply with Mark Liu as my name but netsec@rescomp.berkeley.edu as my email address. Neat, huh?  Here is how you do it:

`folder-hook ~/Mail/netsec 'set from="netsec@rescomp.berkeley.edu"'`

You must set a default folder-hook because folder-hooks will carry over from the previous folder when you change into a new folder:

`folder-hook . 'set from="markliu@rescomp.berkeley.edu"'`

*Note*: Customarily, this default folder-hook should be set first.

Here's a sample from my .muttrc:

    folder-hook . 'set from="markliu@rescomp.berkeley.edu"'
    folder-hook netsec 'set from="netsec@rescomp.berkeley.edu"'
    folder-hook sec_mail 'set from="security@rescomp.berkeley.edu"'
    folder-hook sec_notifications 'set from="security@rescomp.berkeley.edu"'
    [...]

Folder hooks can be used to set, unset, toggle, , such as setting one mailbox to be sorted by date:

    folder-hook inbox 'set sort=date'

As a matter of fact, folder hooks will execute any "command" you specify when you're in that folder.  A "command" will usually consist of changing some mutt variable, like the ones listed in your .muttrc.  More can be found in the [Mutt documentation](http://dev.mutt.org/doc/manual.html#set-commands).

## Save-Hooks and Other Hooks

Save hooks work very similarly to folder hooks. By default, pressing `s` to save messages in mutt sends it to the =keep folder. You can specify where you want to keep those saved messages:

    save-hook . =saved
    save-hook ~/mail/inbox =important

As you can see, these may not be as widely used as folder hooks but can come in handy sometimes.  Read up on the [documentation](http://dev.mutt.org/doc/manual.html#hooks) for the other types of hooks: send-hooks, message-hooks, ...

## Macros

Macros allow you to map one or two buttons to execute a huge series of commands. For example, I really hate typing commands to save week-old emails from security to =sec_archive. This can be done with one macro instead of going out of the way to tag all messages and save and then select a folder. 

Do more work for me, computer!!!

`macro index ",s"        "T~d >1w\n;s=sec_archive\n"`

When I type `,s`, magic happens:

   * T
      * Tag all messages matching:
   * ~d 
      * days
   * >1w 
      * greater than 1 week
   * \n 
      * hits enter
   * ; 
      * apply the following command to all tagged messages:
   * s=sec_archive
      * save the messages to sec_archive
   * \n 
      * press enter again. 

Usually you don't need to write macros this complicated, but I did this just to prove that it could be done, and I actually use this macro quite often.  If you believe, it can be done.

## Adding Custom Headers

Some people have mail agents that will display an Organization: header. You can use this to let people know that you are a representative of !ResComp by adding this to your .muttrc:

    my_hdr Organization: Residential Computing

You can also add other silly things if you want (e.g. a field:`=X-Sender-Mood: Cranky`) if you are that type of person.

# Muttrc Builder

If you feel that you can do more with mutt, but don't know how, here's a tool that will let you customize every last setting in your `.muttrc`! [Muttrc builder](http://muttrcbuilder.org/) has pretty good explanations on what each setting does so you can fearlessly go about tweaking your own `.muttrc`. You can even preview possible color combinations.

*Note*: When you first visit the site you will be prompted for the version of Mutt you want to create a .muttrc for. You can find the current version of Mutt running on Hal by typing `mutt -v`.

# Full Documentation

As you can tell, there's a *LOT* to learn about mutt.  Check out the official documentation: [http://dev.mutt.org/doc/manual.html](http://dev.mutt.org/doc/manual.html)


[muttrc]: https://github.com/eskfung/configs/blob/master/.muttrc