---
layout: post
title: Embedding Wistia Videos
categories: kissmetrics-test
---
<script type='text/javascript'>
  // Example 1: Demonstrating 'record' by recording an event upon page load
  _kmq.push(['record', 'Viewed Example Page']);
</script>

## The event "Viewed Example Page" has been triggered

Putting a 'record' command directly in the body means that the JavaScript executes as the page is loaded. Thus, you can use it to track an event upon page load.

<script type='text/javascript'>
  // Example 2: Demonstrating 'trackClick' with an element ID
  _kmq.push(['trackClick', 'linkid1', 'Clicked a Link Tracked By ID']);

  // Example 3: Demonstrating 'trackClick' with an element Class
  _kmq.push(['trackClick', '.button', 'Clicked a Link Tracked By Class']);

  // trackClick takes only a single HTML ID or class. There's no support yet for more complex selectors like jQuery would allow.
</script>

## The three links below have been instrumented for tracking.

<ul>
    <li>
      <a href='#' id='linkid1' onclick="example2()";>Link 1: HTML ID is 'linkid1'</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href='#' id='linkid2' class="button big" onclick="example3()";>Link 2: HTML ID is 'linkid2'; members of Classes 'button' and 'big'</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href='#' id='linkid3' class="button small" onclick="example3()";>Link 3: HTML ID is 'linkid3'; members of Classes 'button' and 'small'</a>
    </li>
</ul>

## Alternative link to demonstrate other uses for 'record'
      
<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='#' id='linkid4' onclick="example4()";>Link 4: an event is set up to use this link's onclick action</a>
  </li>
</ul>

<script type='text/javascript'>
  // Example 5: Demonstrating 'trackClickOnOutboundLink'
  _kmq.push(['trackClickOnOutboundLink', 'kmdemo', 'Clicked Away to Demo']);

  // trackClickOnOutboundLink takes only a single HTML ID or class. There's no support yet for more complex selectors like jQuery would allow.
</script>

## Tracking Outbound Links. The link below takes you to the KISSmetrics demo, but records an event "Clicked Away to Demo" first.

<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='http://www.kissmetrics.com/demo' id='kmdemo' onclick="example5()";>Link 5: a link to www.kissmetrics.com/demo</a>
  </li>
</ul>

<script type='text/javascript'>
  // Example 6: Demonstrating 'trackSubmit'
  _kmq.push(['trackSubmit', 'demoform', 'Submitted Demo Form']);

  // trackClickOnOutboundLink takes only a single HTML ID or class. There's no support yet for more complex selectors like jQuery would allow.
</script>

## Tracking Forms
      
<form id="demoform" action="#" onsubmit="example6()">
  <input type="text" name="email" placeholder="'email' field"> </input>
  <input type="text" name="field1" placeholder="'field1' field"> </input>
  <input type="submit"></input>
</form>

## Obtaining your current identity from JavaScript

<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='#' onclick="example7()";>Link 7: click this to get your current ID</a>
  </li>
</ul>

## Set your identity

<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='#' onclick="example8()";>Link 8: click this to identify yourself as "bob@bob.com"</a>
  </li>
</ul>

## Clear your identity

<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='#' onclick="example9()";>Link 9: unidentify yourself and become anonymous again</a>
  </li>
</ul>

## Running A/B tests with our JavaScript Library

<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='#' onclick="example10()";>Link 10: unidentify yourself and become anonymous again</a>
  </li>
</ul>

## Obtaining the current time in Unix time

<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='#' onclick="example11()";>Link 11: click this to get the current timestamp. This is how we obtain the time for when an event occurs.</a>
  </li>
</ul>

## Running an A/B Test

<ul>
  <li>
    <a href='#' onclick="example12()";>Link 12: click this to run an a/b test. We'll pick between two variations, "Variation A" and "Variation B".</a>
  </li>
</ul>
  
<script type='text/javascript'>
// JS for setting up examples
// Some customers place all of their tracking code like this in a separate analytics.js file and source it separately
function example2 () {
alert('You triggered an event "Clicked a Link Tracked By ID"')
  }
function example3 () {
alert('You triggered an event "Clicked a Link Tracked By Class"')
  }

function example4 () {
_kmq.push(['record', "Clicked a Link, Recorded using `record`"]);
alert('You triggered an event "Clicked a Link, Recorded using `record`"')
  }

function example5 () {
alert('You triggered an event "Clicked Away to Demo". Now you will be redirected to kissmetrics.com/demo')
  }

function example6 () {
alert('You triggered an event "Submitted Demo Form". We can also auto-track form fields, so you also got additional properties set.')
  }

function example7 () {
_kmq.push(function() {
  alert('The KM JavaScript library identifies you as ' + KM.i());
});
  }

function example8 () {
_kmq.push(['identify', 'bob@bob.com']);
alert('You are now identified to our JavaScript library as bob@bob.com. Any events you trigger from now on will appear as being done by bob@bob.com. If you were anonymous before now, we automatically connected your anonymous ID with bob@bob.com, so both IDs represent the same person.');
  }

function example9 () {
_kmq.push(['clearIdentity']);
// Equivalent:    _kmq.push(['identify', '']);
alert('If you had a named identity, it is now cleared and our library has generated a new Anonymous ID for this browser. If you were already anonymous, nothing changes.');
  }

function example11 () {
_kmq.push(function() {
  var time = KM.ts();
  var date = new Date(KM.ts() * 1000);
  alert('KM detects the current time as ' + time + ". In a more human-readable format, it's " + date);
});
  }

  function example12 () {
  _kmq.push(function() {
    var variation = KM.ab("A/B Test Variation", ["Variation A", "Variation B"]);
    alert('For this browser, KM selected variation "' + variation + '". We set a KM property "A/B Test Variation" with the value "' + variation + '" and saved the results to a cookie so that this person sees the same variation whenever coming back. Additionally, the variation selected is now saved to a JavaScript variable named "variation".');
  });
  }

</script>