---
layout: post
title: PGP
categories: twiki
---

You can use PGP to sign and encrypt your email.  Signing mail verifies to the recipient that you (and not someone posing as you) actually sent it, and encrypting mail prevents everyone but the recipient from reading it.

Public Key Cryptography is explained by a simple analogy. It works on the basic premise that you have one key that opens many, many of your locks. You distribute these locks to everyone you know. If they want to send you a message, they put their message inside a box and lock it with one of your locks. You, being the sole owner of the key, are the only person capable of unlocking the box.

At Rescomp, we have the GNU implementation GPG (Gnu Privacy Guard) installed.  That explains why all the commands are `gpg` commands.  More info about GPG can be found [here][gpg-howto]. 

## Initial Setup

### Create Your Key Pair

Before you can start using PGP, you have to create an identity for yourself in the form of a key pair. On Hal, run:

    gpg --gen-key

Use the default algorithm and keysize. You should also use your ResComp email address (you can edit the key and add other identities later). Follow all the directions. Your passphrase should be long and difficult, but you will also be typing it in somewhat frequently. Use good judgment.


# UserID

#### About UserIDs

Editing a key requires knowing its !UserID (UID):  Here's how to find it.

   * For example, list all your PGP keys:  `gpg --list-keys`
   * You should, at the very least, have your own public key. Look up the 8-digit hexadecimal number (0-9A-F) in the line that starts with "pub". This is the UID.


### Fixing Config Files

Below is a sample, recommended configuration for using GPG with Mutt. Uncomment or add the lines to the proper files.

#### `~/.gnupg/gpg.conf`

Major PGP keyservers synchronize with each other, but setting one by default makes it a little easier to find a public key that has been freshly uploaded.

    default-key YOURUSERID
    use-agent
    
    keyserver pool.sks-keyservers.net
    keyserver-options auto-key-retrieve include-disabled include-revoked honor-keyserver-url
    armor
    encrypt-to YOURUSERID

#### `~/.muttrc`
These settings allow you to automatically sign all your email and encrypt responses to encrypted mail.

    ##
    # PGP Settings
    ##
    set pgp_autosign            #sign ALL outgoing messages
    set pgp_replyencrypt        #encrypt replies on encrypted mail
    set pgp_replysign           #sign replies on signed mail
    set pgp_replysignencrypted  #sign replies on encrypted mail
    set pgp_show_unusable=no    #don't offer invalid keys on the pgp menuset 
    pgp_timeout=7200            #forget PGP passphrase after 7200 seconds (=2 hours)

## Receiving Public Keys and the UID

If you get an email from someone and do not have their public key yet, the above GPG settings will do it automatically for you.

## Signing Keys

*Warning:* **In order to maintain the integrity of the web of trust, you should only sign keys that you have actually identified.  Anyone can post a public key and claim to be whoever they want.  Before you sign a key, you may have to go as far as check ID or make sure you know the person well enough.  Attend keysigning parties and verify in person!**

Now that you have a key, you should verify it before signing it.  Run:

    gpg --fingerprint UID

You get a sample of the public key you have received. Compare it against the key owner's fingerprint (use the same command). If the two match up, you have verified the keys are identical and you can safely sign it:

    gpg --sign-key UID

Once you've signed the key, upload it back to the keyserver so people can see you have signed this key:

    gpg --send-key UID

The reverse operation fetches updated keys (with new signatures) from the keyserver.

    gpg --refresh-keys

or

    gpg --recv-keys UID


##The Web of Trust

PGP exercises the idea of a web of trust on the internet. The idea is that through keysigning, you can prove the identity of a stranger. For example, let's consider Anne, Bob, and Chris (me!). If I (Chris) have verified Bob's identity, I acknowledge it by signing his key.  My signature is proof of my trust that Bob's key can identify Bob. One day, I get an e-mail signed from Anne. I look at her public key and see that Bob has also signed *her* key.  Because I trust Bob to have previously verified Anne's identity, I can also trust that Anne's key is legitimate: she is who she says she is.

You can modify your whole web of trust by running:

`gpg --update` or `gpg --edit-key UID`.  At `Command>`, type `trus`= to get a menu of several levels of trust.

Trust Level | Description
----------- | -----------
1 Don't Know | Nothing special.
2 Don't Trust | I don't trust this guy at all to verify keys.  He signed Tupac's!
3 Marginal | I trust this person a little.  I need 3 people I marginally trust to have also signed a stranger's key before I automatically sign it myself.
4 Full | I trust this person fully.  Only 1 person I fully trust needs to sign a stranger's key before I automatically sign it (like in the example above).
5 Ultimate | Basically, this key is as good as my key.  Pretty intense.

## Encrypting Email in Mutt

Create mail as you normally would, then, before actually sending it, hit `p` (instead of hitting `y` to send) to bring up pgp options. Then hit `e` to encrypt or `b` to both encrypt and sign.

**Remember to read the sections on signing keys and the web of trust. You must be mindful of PGP's security implications, and any carelessness can compromise our web of trust.**

   * 1) Make your own key pair: `gpg --gen-key`
   * 2) Edit your ~/.gnupg/gpg.conf and ~/.muttrc

The following steps need to be repeated when getting new public keys.

   * 3) Import people's public keys: `gpg --recv-key UID` or `gpg --import FILENAME`
   * 4) Verify (in person if possible) that it really is *their* public key: compare your result of `gpg --fingerprint UID` against the fingerprint of the public key's owner (who can run the same command on their public key).
   * 5) After verification, sign the key: `gpg --sign-key UID`
   * 6) Upload the key to the keyserver so that people can see you have signed this public key: `gpg --send-key UID`; `gpg --refresh-keys`
   * 7) Optional: establish your web of trust: `gpg --update`

## Useful Commands

Command | Description
------- | -----------
`gpg --list-keys` | Lists all the public keys on your keyring.
`gpg --send-keys UID` | Upload keys to the default keyserver.
`gpg --refresh-keys` | Imports from the keyserver all the public keys on your keyring to check for additional signatures, etc.
`gpg --update` | Updates local trust database.
 |
`gpg --gen-key` | Create a new key pair.
`gpg --fingerprint UID` | Displays a public key's fingerprint for use in verifying a person's identity.
`gpg --edit-key UID` | Options specific to a key: change passphrase, change trust, revoke signatures, ...
`gpg --recv-key UID` | Import a public key from the keyserver.

# References

   * [Basics of PGP](http://www.hackinglinuxexposed.com/articles/20040427.html) -- Good explanation of what the PGP messages in your email headers mean.
   * [Gnu Privacy Guard (GnuPG) Mini Howto](http://www.dewinter.com/gnupg_howto/english/GPGMiniHowto.html)
   * [Mutt Guide](http://codesorcery.net/mutt/mutt-gnupg-howto)
   * [Web of Trust](http://www.rubin.ch/pgp/weboftrust.en.html)

[gpg-howto]: http://www.dewinter.com/gnupg_howto/english/GPGMiniHowto.html