---
layout: post
title: Procmail
categories: twiki
---

Procmail is a mail filtering system. Depending on how you configure your procmail, you can process your mail for many purposes, including automatically sending mail to different folders, automatically deleting messages that match a certain expression, or even executing commands on each message for processing.

You will need a configured `.procmailrc` file. Most of you should have them in your home directories.

If you view your `.procmailrc`, you may see several "recipes", the heart of Procmail's sorting.  A recipe must have:

   * A colon line that begins `:0`
   * Condition(s): the message filters.  You can have several in one recipe.
   * A single action: performed on messages that match the conditions

## The Colon line:

* The minimum is `:0`
  * Can include *flags*, but `:0` defaults to `:0 Hhb`
    * H: allows the headers of the message to be examined
    * h: allows the headers to be fed to the *action line*.
    * b: allows the body to be fed to the *action line*.
  * Other useful flags:
    * B: allow matching to be done in the body of the message.
    * D: make matches case sensitive. Procmail is insensitive by default.
    * c: clone a message and execute commands on it without destroying the original message
* `:0:` means that you use a *lockfile*
  * Lock files prevent a message from being changed by two actions. 

## The Conditions

* Generally, you want a condition for each recipe.
  * You can also leave off the condition to unconditionally process each message. This is especially useful as the last recipe, where you catch all unprocessed messages and execute a particular command on it, like saving it to your inbox or unfiled folders.
* A condition line begins with a `*`, and you can test with regular expressions, size of message, and a few other methods.
  * Eg. `* ^Subject:.*test` looks in the subject for any number (*) of any character, including no character (.) preceding the word "test".
  * Basically applies to any messages with "test" in the subject.

### More Examples
   
* `* ^TO_ux-helpdesk@rescomp` matches messages sent to the specified helpdesk queue.
* `* ^Subject:.*(Meeting|Appointment)` matches any email with subject containing the words "Meeting" or "Appointment"
* `* ^(From|Cc):.sysadmin@rescomp` matches all email sent from or cc'd to sysadmin. Handle with extra care!

## The Action Line

* Specify what you want to do with messages that meet the above conditions.
* Most likely, you'll just want to save to a particular folder or delete it entirely.
* To save the message to a folder, specify the path to folders as the action line.

Example:

    MAILDIR=$HOME/Mail
    :0
    * ^From:*via RT*
    $MAILDIR/Helpdesk

* You can also pipe a particular email to a shell command using a pipe ( `|` ).

## Further Reading

Procmail documentation can be rather dense. Here is a rather thorough website that walks you through everything Procmail can do. The link takes you immediately to the section on Understanding Recipes, the most relevant section for you: [http://www.ii.com/internet/robots/procmail/qs/#recipes](http://www.ii.com/internet/robots/procmail/qs/#recipes)