---
layout: post
title: IRC
categories: twiki
published: false
---

IRC here does not refer to In-Room Connection, but Internet Relay Chat. It allows for IM'ing through chat rooms ("channels") as well as private messages.   This makes it easy for most RSSP-IT team to be quickly accessible.
   * #general open to all topics
   * #code for the Programmers team
   * #sysadmin for the System Administrators
   * #us for the Unit Supervisors
   * #da for the Desktop Administrators

---++ Get Connected!

All users with Hal accounts can SSH to =irc.housing.berkeley.edu=.  Most employees stay connected to IRC 24/7 by using [[ResComp.Screen][GnuScreen]]. That way, they can receive messages while they are away from a computer and check them later.  See the documentation at [[ResComp.Screen]] and [[NI.UnixSys.GnuScreen]] for setting up Screen, otherwise exclude it from the commands:

<verbatim>
ssh USER_NAME@irc.housing.berkeley.edu
screen
irssi
</verbatim>

Type this into the irssi:

<verbatim>
/server irc.housing.berkeley.edu
/join #general or /j general
</verbatim>

---++ Adding a Custom Statusbar to the Bottom
Frankly, irssi's statusbar is a little crippled. There's a great perl script called Advanced Windowlist to enhance that. You can copy it from a user who has it (create the folders first!) and set it up as such:

<verbatim>
mkdir ~/.irssi/scripts
cp -R ~efung/.irssi/scripts/autorun ~/.irssi/scripts/autorun/
irssi
/run autorun/adv_windowlist.pl
/statusbar window remove act

/set awl_display_key [$Q %y$H$C$S]
/set awl_block 0
</verbatim>

The last two lines will customize the bar to list the window number and name (in yellow) for all the active windows you have open.  The different $ variables are listed in the comments within the script, and you can change the color to be something else.  Refer to the [[http://www.irssi.org/documentation/formats][color guide]].

---+++ Chatting and Simple Commands

__Note: the rest of the guide will assume you're using irssi.  Some of the commands may not work, but the majority of them should.  Check your client's documentation for details.__

To chat, just type what you want to say. Simple as that. Some helpful commands:

*Commands to Use Elsewhere*
|  *Command*  |  *Description*  |
| =/msg nick MESSAGE= | Initiates a 1-to-1 chat session with the nick you queried. This is called a private message (pm for short). |
| =/list= | List all the channels available on the server. |
| =/names= | Lists all the users in the current channel. |
| =/topic= and =/topic NEW_TOPIC= | =/topic= by itself lets you view the active channel's current topic. If you have permission, you can use the command to set the channel topic to a topic of your choice. |
| =/whois nick= | Gives you some information about the nick you queried (name, what channels he/she is in, etc.).  Try it out. |

*Commands That Affect You*
|  *Command*  |  *Description*  |
| =/me MESSAGE= | Appears as =*your_nick MESSAGE=. So for example, =/me waves to everyone= becomes =*milki waves to everyone= |
| =/nick NEW_NICK= | Changes your nickname (=/nick Rand_Wacker= will change my nick to Rand_Wacker) |
| =/reload= | Reloads the configuration files in =~/.irssi/= if you've made a change and don't want to quit irssi to apply changes.  See milki's [[#ConfigurationFile][sample one]] below. |
| | |
| =/set VARIABLE= and =/save= | There are numerous variables you can set for irssi, such as [[#ChangeTheme][changing themes]], whether you want your client to automatically bold words in =*this format*=, etc.  Type =/set= without arguments to see what you can change, and =/save= after making changes.  Do refer to documentation, as this tool is potentially very powerful, and with great power comes great responsibility. |

*Quitting or closing windows*
|  *Command*  |  *Description*  |
| =/window close= | Closes the active window.  This could be a private message, a channel, or the status window. |
| =/part= or =/leave= | Leave the current channel. |
| =/disconnect= | Disconnect from the server. |
| =/exit= or =/quit= | Close your IRC client. |

---+++ Navigating

*Previous chat history*:  This may seem silly and obvious, but you can =Page Up= and =Page Down= through the chat history if you've been in the channel and stepped out for a bit.

*Switching windows*:  The meta key for irssi is either =Esc= or =Alt=. For OS X, you can make =Alt/Option= be the meta key for Terminal.  You can always map this to be something else.
   * Meta+number:   Switch to window number
   * Meta+n:   Switch to next window
   * Meta+p:   Switch to previous window

---++ Miscellaneous Tips

In this section, you can learn to improve your irssi experience.

---+++ Split Windows
Irssi can display more than one channel at a time by splitting your screen.  If you thought [[ResComp.Screen][GnuScreen]] was a little confusing, irssi throws another variable into the mix: stickiness.  [[http://quadpoint.org/articles/irssisplit][This guide]] will help you get the basics down.

Still confused?  Basically, a container (area for a window to go) needs to have more than one window (channel, status window, pm, etc.) "stickied" to it before you can shuffle windows up and down easily.  I recommend turning off =autostick_split_windows= and manually sticking each of your windows to a container before turning it back on.

One last note: with split windows, it'll be hard to tell which channel you're actually active in.  This leads to embarrassing results, like thinking you are pm-ing someone when the text ends up in #general.  Ouch.  As a solution, you can color the statusbar of your active window.  Insert a line of code into your theme file:

<verbatim>
  ##
  ## statusbar
  ##

  sb_window_bg = "%5%w"; </verbatim>

This will set your active window's statusbar to be an obnoxious white-on-magenta.  Again, refer to the color guide for personalizing this feature. 

#ChangeTheme
---+++ Changing Themes

If you ever get sick of the default blue-and-white, get a new theme from the [[http://www.irssi.org/themes][irssi website]]. Put the theme in your =~/.irssi= folder and =/set theme THEME_NAME= (like the site says...).

Otherwise, if you're feeling 1337, you can try changing only certain colors in your theme. Using this [[http://www.irssi.org/documentation/formats][Irssi Color Reference]], go ahead and try editing =~/.irssi/default.theme= to customize your colors.  For example, you can change the colors of the brackets around a nick (23:30 < efung> message) to be something more readable than black.  I'll let you take it from here.

#ConfigurationFile
---++ Config

Irssi's configuration is stored in =~/.irssi/config=. Below is a sample config file. I alias the server to irc and specified channels that I can auto-join on connect when I join the aliased server =/server irc=. I also specified my nick information and set highlighting on.

<pre>
servers = (
  {
    address = "irc.housing.berkeley.edu";
    chatnet = "irc";
    port = "6697";
  }
);

chatnets = { irc = { type = "IRC"; }; };

channels = (
  { name = "#general"; chatnet = "irc"; autojoin = "Yes"; },
  { name = "#code"; chatnet = "irc"; autojoin = "Yes"; },
  { name = "#sysadmin"; chatnet = "irc"; autojoin = "Yes"; }
);
settings = {
  core = {
    real_name = "YOUR_NAME";
    user_name = "YOUR_USERNAME";
    nick = "YOUR_NICK";
  };
};
hilights = ( { text = "YOUR_NICK"; word = "yes"; } );
</pre>

---+++ Using a Local Program with SSH Tunneling

SSH tunneling will enable the use of your own local client (mIRC, Opera). Please note that if you choose to tunnel your connection, you should disable local logging of conversations; if your computer gets compromised, we don't want however many months or years worth of logs (and code!) distributed publicly.

<verbatim>ssh -f -N -L 6697:irc.housing.berkeley.edu:6697 USER_NAME@irc.housing.berkeley.edu</verbatim>

Following [[http://www.ssh.com/support/documentation/online/ssh/adminguide/32/Port_Forwarding.html][this guide]], you can use your local IRC client (see some examples below) to connect to =localhost:6697=

---++ Opera

[[http://www.opera.com/][Opera]] is a cross-platform, hyper-optimized web browser that is astoundingly standards-compliant. AND it has a built-in IRC client.

   * Tools > Mail and Chat Accounts...
   * Click Add
   * Choose Chat (IRC)
   * Continue filling in personal details
   * When it comes time to choose an IRC server, manually type in 'localhost'
   * Finish, but then Close out of the room list and back to Tools > Mail and Chat Accounts...
   * Select your new IRC account and click Edit...
   * Under the Servers tab, change the port to 6697 (or whatever localhost port you may want to forward)

Do the SSH Tunneling described above to forward irc.housing.berkeley:6697 to your local port. Once that's set up, you should be able to go up into Chat > List Rooms... and see a list of the chat rooms on irc.housing!

From there on, it's all quite straightforward due to the ease-of-use of the Opera IRC interface. If you have comments about the GUI (good or bad), please let [[Main.SimonTan][Simon]] know. He's nuts about that sort of stuff.

---++ mIRC
[[http://www.mirc.com/][mIRC]] is a popular Windows IRC client. The one downside is that you *MUST* disable logging, as this feature is enabled automatically.

   * This portion assumes you have properly configured a tunnel using !PuTTY as described [[ResComp.ProxyConnections][here]]. If not, set up a tunnel first!
   * Open the mIRC options and fill in the following details
      * Connect
         * Full Name: Your Name
         * Email Address: Your Email
         * Nickname: Your Desired Nickname
      * Servers
         * Add a new server with the following details:
            * Description: -anything-
            * IRC Server: localhost
            * Ports: 6697
         * Click 'Select' to select this server to connect to
      * Firewall
         * Firewall supprot: Server
         * Protocol: Socks5
         * Hostname: localhost
         * Port: -the port you configured your tunnel with-
      * IRC
         * Logging: 
            * Automatically log: none

If you completed everything correctly, you should be able to use mIRC as an alternative client. Enjoy!

---+ References
   * [[http://quadpoint.org/articles/irssi#channel_statusbar_using_advanced_windowlist][Irssi Starter's Guide]]:  A good place to start. Be sure to check out Advanced Windowlist.
   * [[http://www.irssi.org/documentation/formats][Irssi Colors Reference]]
   * [[http://quadpoint.org/articles/irssisplit][Guide to Splitting Windows]]
   * [[http://www.ssh.com/support/documentation/online/ssh/adminguide/32/Port_Forwarding.html][Guide to SSH Forwarding]]

   * [[http://www.irssi.org/documentation/manual][Irssi Manual]]
   * [[http://www.irssi.org/documentation/settings][Irssi's Settings]]
---
compiled by milki, efung, and eleung (mIRC usage)