# Recap

This morning, the computer would not let you login since the part that lets you validate your copy of Windows didn't have all the parts it expected. This afternoon, I tried to repair Windows but with an XP CD my dad had, but the XP reinstallation ran into problems cause it couldn't find files it was expecting. That means the desktop has half of XP installed...so that's why you're getting the Windows Installer messages when trying to open Internet Explorer or any folders.

## What's next:

1. Reinstall XP to get it *functional*. Functional = Internet Explorer working, and you're able to open folders without waiting for Windows Installer.

2. Deal with Windows Activation.

3. Patch XP to be *secure*.


# 1. Repair XP

## Boot to CD

* Start the computer.
* Press F9 on the BIOS screen (the blue screen that says HP).
* While we're waiting, you can insert the XP CD that came with the computer.
* Choose to boot from the Optical Drive and press enter.
* It'll drop you to a black screen...wait for the CD to be ready, and then press any key when it's ready.

## Start the repair

* Let the Windows Installer set itself up.
* Now ***SLOW DOWN*** because going the wrong way here can erase all of the data on the computer.

* When you see the "Welcome To Setup" screen, you will see the options below  

	This portion of the Setup program prepares Microsoft 
	   Windows XP to run on your computer:

	   To setup Windows XP now, press ENTER.

	   To repair a Windows XP installation using Recovery Console, press R.

	   To quit Setup without installing Windows XP, press F3.

* Press Enter to start the Windows Setup. 
* Accept the License Agreement and Windows will search for existing Windows installations.
* Select the XP installation you want to repair from the list and press R to start the repair. If Repair is not one of the options, **END setup**.
* Setup will copy the necessary files to the hard drive and reboot.  Do not press any key to boot from CD when the message appears.

## Push Windows through installation

* Windows will itself, and it takes about 35 minutes of waiting around.
* About 20 minutes in, there will be one prompt that you can just Continue through.
* With any luck, the installation will finish and drop you in the desktop.

# 2. Deal with Windows Activation

* When you first log in, it'll ask you to activate. I think it'll be fine if you let it.
* Ignore whatever it's doing, and move on to...
* Open up the Installers folder
* Unzip the XP SP3 zip file.
* Open it up and run `AntiWPA3.cmd` inside.

# 3. Patch Up to SP3 (Service Pack 3)

* Also in the Installers folder, run `SP3.exe`
* This is a lot of sitting around and waiting.

# 4. Install patches after SP3

* Open "Windows Update" from the start menu and click through the page to search for all the updates and install all the "Critical" ones.