---
layout: post
title: GNU Screen
categories: writing
---

Screen allows a user on a host to maintain a persistent terminal.

## Why Should You Care
* Screen allows you to keep a consistent state of work even if you disconnect from the Internet or close your terminal.
* You can access your work (that is on the host) from a different computer.
* You'll be able to resume your work as if nothing has happened.

## Getting Started

* Copy someone's existing .screenrc configuration file. I keep a [sample on Github][screen-template].

## Get the Terminology Straight!
__There is a significant difference in what I mean when I refer to "terminal", "screen session/screen", and "window".__

 Terminology | Description
 ------ | ------
Terminal | Program that gives you a terminal (eg. xterm, gnome-terminal, konsole ...)
Screen session or screen | A virtual session. Totally distinct from the original session that was started when you first ran the terminal and in which you created the screen session.
Window | "Tabs" like in Firefox or Chrome within the screen session. (Think of screen session as a browser and the "windows" are the tabs of that browser).

## Important commands and their flags:

Command | Description
------ | ------
`screen`  | Begins a single screen session.
`screen -d`  | *Detaches* your current screen session and takes you back to the session in which you created the screen. Note this is different from disconnecting or killing your session.
`screen -rd [pid]`  | *Reattaches* an existing session to the terminal you're using and disconnects you from any other open terminals that may be currently connected to it.  For example, if you have a screen session open on Ginger and try to recall it from Dementia, you are logged out of the session in Ginger and reopen the session in Dementia.
`screen -ls`  | Lists all your current screen sessions.
`screen -S _session-name_`  | Create a screen with the *session name* you specify.  Useful for keeping track of multiple screens.
`screen -x`  | Reattaches to an already-attached screen session.  This allows you to have two terminals with the same screen session on them.  Remember that it _is_ the same session, so renaming or killing any _windows_ in it (see below), or even killing the session itself will affect both terminals.
`kill [pid]`  | *Kills* screen if you are detached. This is handy if you created too many screens. Type `screen -ls` first and it should list the processes of screen you have an example is such: `90001.ttys1.hal (Detached)` and so the pid is 90001 and you would type `kill 90001` to kill the screen.

_Creating a screen within a screen (ie, running the screen command within a screen session) will create a new Window, assuming you're on the same server that the original screen was created on._

## Once inside a screen session...

*Use the following commands within a screen session to navigate your windows.*

Verbatim Command | Description
------ | ------
CTRL-a, d  | *Detaches* the screen from the current terminal.  Especially useful if you've screen -x'd.
CTRL-a, *  | Lists the terminals in which your screen is active.
CTRL-a, c  | *Creates* a new _window_. These are much like "tabs" in Firefox. Note you can have multiple windows in a single screen as well as multiple screen sessions.
CTRL-a, K  | *Kills* the current window.  Killing the last window in a screen kills the screen.
CTRL-a, "  | Displays a *list* of windows to select.
CTRL-a, n  | Switch to the *next* window.
CTRL-a, p  | Switch to the *previous* window.
CTRL-a, [0-9]  | Switch to window #(0-9).
CTRL-a, A  | *Rename* your current window.
CTRL-a, S  | *Splits* your terminal and creates a _region_.  With regions, you can view two or more windows (in only your current screen) at the same time.  Be sure you use capital S, because =^a s= is the xoff command, which makes it look like your screen froze up.  Correct this by =^a q= (xon).
CTRL-a, Tab  | Switches *focus* to the next region, from which you can switch to a new window.
CTRL-a, X  | Removes current region.  Note: =^a x= locks your terminal and will ask for a key.  By default, there is no password, but you can set this up as well for more security.

## Extra Tips

There's more info out there to learn how to set your own keybindings, securing your screens with passwords, and copying text across screens.  I used [this site][screen-doc].

[screen-doc]: http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/Documentation/Gnu/screen-3.9.4/html_chapter/screen_toc.html
[screen-template]: https://github.com/eskfung/configs/blob/master/.screenrc
