---
layout: post
title: Fluxbox
categories: writing
---

Fluxbox is a very minimalist, very customizable X window manager. Fluxbox is not a full-on desktop environment and thus starts up with just the bare essentials: a menu and a taskbar.  GNOME and KDE, on the other hand, are both desktop environments with their own window managers--`metacity` and `kwin` by default, or even `compiz`.  For this reason, you cannot use compiz effects with fluxbox. But that's only a small sacrifice for the customizability. So here we go!

## Where Is Everything?  (Menus)

Upon first logging in, you'll first notice a LOT of screen space at your disposal.  Instead of a classic "start menu" in a corner, a right-click on the desktop brings up your menu--the root menu.  It takes some getting used to, but once you have the menu just as you like it, it's extremely helpful.  Edit the menu by opening `~/.fluxbox/menu` in a text editor.

Once you start to wrap your head around it, you'll see each shortcut is defined as:

    [exec] (name) {command or path} <icon location>

The icon is optional.

   * **Checkpoint**: Try editing your own menu by adding Firefox to the very top of your menu.
      * Hint: `[exec] (Firefox) {firefox}`
   * *Note*: `[separator]` does what it says, separates entries with a line.
   * If your menus don't automatically update, try selecting "Reload config" or "Restart" from the menu.

While you're at it, choose an aesthetically pleasing style. I've used `bora_blue` or `bora_black` in the past.

## Middle-Click  (Workspaces)

Separate workspaces exist so you can put programs in different areas, right?  Maybe I don't want to have my music player on the same area as my chat and browser.  So why is it so hard to do that in GNOME?? BLAH.

You'll notice that middle-clicking brings up the workspace menu, from which you can add, delete, and rename workspaces as well as jump to any minimized program (under icons) or any other program.  Right-clicking on the program itself gives you a whole new menu:

*Command* | *Description*
--------- | -------------
shade | Reverse-minimize.  Basically hides everything except the titlebar and the buttons on it.
stick | Keeps the application visible on every workspace.
maximize | Maximizes.  Right.
iconify | Minimize as you know it.
raise | Brings the window in focus.
lower | Puts the window out of focus.
Send to... | Put the window on another workspace.
Layer | Positions the window in relation to others.  Not totally sure on the differences between each setting.
Transparency | Self-explanatory.
Remember... | Remembers the settings you applied above when you open the program next time (Workspace!!!).  Again, I'm not clear on all the options.

## Hotkeys!!
Yessssss. You thought that the readily-available menu was awesome? Fluxbox's hotkeys __alone__ makes the switch so worthwhile. You can map _any_ shortcut you like to _any_ keybinding. Pretty much. [This is a list][shortcuts] of all the commands built into Fluxbox.

Open up `~/.fluxbox/keys` in a text editor.  You normally start a command with Shift, Control, Alt (Mod1), and/or Win Key (Mod4) and another key.  If you're not sure how to name the other key (like space bar, backspace, etc.), you can run the command `xev` to get an event viewer.  Pressing the key will output a bunch of data into your terminal and you can dig out the keycode and name from it.  For example:

    KeyRelease event, serial 32, synthetic NO, window 0x1a00001, root 0x87,
    subw 0x0, time 1748007, (294,-2), root:(377,132), state 0x0, keycode 9
    (keysym 0xff1b, Escape), same_screen YES, XLookupString gives 1 bytes:
    (1b) " " XFilterEvent returns: False

This is the output from pressing `Esc`.  Notice in the 2nd line `keycode 9 (keysym 0xff1b, Escape)`.

   * For example, I set Ctrl-Alt-Backspace to log me out quickly.  This is done by `Control Mod1 BackSpace :Exec exit`.
   * *Checkpoint*: Restore the ability for Alt-F4 to close windows.
      * Hint: `Mod1 F4 :________`
   * *Checkpoint*: Create a shortcut to lock your screen.
      * Hint: `:Exec xscreensaver-command -lock`

This section doesn't do Keys justice. I kept around my old Fluxbox set of keys [on Github][keys], so check it out and research more on your own.

## Familiar Ground (Tabs)

Gotta love tabs. Now you can tab two completely different applications together, if you so choose. Middle click the title bar of one and drag it on top of the other. To de-tab the two, middle click on one and drag it off. It helps to have a shortcut to cycle through tabs too.

## Some Mouse Stuff

So you're thinking moving around with the mouse is a bit clunky? Maybe. It all takes getting used to, especially with how sensitive the mouse wheel is when changing workspaces. But did you know you can quickly move windows and resize them?
   * Alt + Hold Left Mouse Button = Drag window
   * Alt + Hold Right Mouse Button = Resize window

## The Slit

From what I understand, the Slit is a kind of sidebar or dock for tiny apps. I personally don't use it, since they're pretty ugly, but you might find it useful. Here's a [jump-off point][slit] if you're interested.

## Annoyances
   * Wallpaper: try adding this line to your init:  `session.screen0.rootCommand:    fbsetbg -f (wallpaper path)`
      * There's also a section you can uncomment in your startup file, but I've had more consistent results with the above.
   * The clock format in the toolbar: no real easy way around it. Run `man date` to get a list of possible entries.
   * File-browser: `Thunar` works pretty well.
   * Quick bail-out to GNOME: it happens, sometimes you want to use GNOME and you don't want to log out.
      * Add this to your menu: `[restart] (GNOME) {gnome-session}`
   * Force Quit: sometimes programs don't respond.
      * Put this in your menu and set a hotkey to it too: `xkill`

## Summary of files

`~/.fluxbox/` Configuration File | Importance
---------------- | -----------
startup |  Add scripts to run at startup. Xscreensaver is a must here.
init  |  Also a configuration file for what runs at startup.  I set the background here.
menu |  Edit your main menu's order and applications, even add icons.
keys|  Add hotkey functionality to quickly execute commands, bring up programs, etc.
apps |  You can let fluxbox remember which workspace to keep programs on, their dimensions, position, etc.  You don't have to touch this.
lastwallpaper |  Tracks the directory of your last wallpaper so you can use `fbsetbg -l` instead of a set path.

## Closing

This guide should have gotten you through a lot of the personalization in Fluxbox. Keep playing with it and tweaking it.  There's plenty more detailed documentation out there.

[keys]: https://github.com/eskfung/configs/blob/master/.fluxbox/keys
[shortcuts]: http://fluxbox-wiki.org/index.php/Keyboard_shortcuts
[slit]: http://fluxbox.sourceforge.net/docbook/en/html/chap-slit.html
